Chapter1: Introduction

1. A tool that manages and tracks different versions of software or other content is referred to generically as a version control system (VCS), a source code manager (SCM), a revision control system (RCS) and so on.

2. Prior to Git, Linux Kernel was developed using the commercial BitKeeper VCS.


Chapter 2: Installing Git

1. Debian/Ubuntu

   -  if you need to transfer a project from Arch, CVS, or Subversion to Git or vice versa, install one or more of these packages:

      git-arch, git-cvs, giv-svn

   -  If you prefer to browser repositories a graphical application or your Web browser, install these:

      git-gui, gitk, gitweb.

   -  git-email

      This is essential if you want to send Git patches through electronic mail, which is a common practice in some projects.

   -  git-daemon-run

      To share your repository, install the package. It creates a daemon service that allows you to share your repository through anonymous download requests.

2. While compiling Git, consult the INSTALL file in the Git source bundle. The file lists several external dependencies, including the zlib, openssl, and libcurl libraries.


Chapter 3: Getting started

1. For a complete (and somewhat daunting) list of git subcommands, type git help --all.

   -  For convinence, documentation for each git subcommand is available using either git help subcommand or git subcommand --help.
   -  You can seperate options from a list of arguments via the "bare double dash" convention. For instance, use the double dash to contrast portion of the command line from a list of operands, such as filenames;

      $ git diff -w master origin -- tools/Makefile.

      You may need to use the double dash to seperate and explicitly identify filenames if they might otherwise be mistaken for another part of the command:

      # Checkout the tag named "main.c"
      $ git checkout main.c
      # Checkout the file named "main.c"
      $ git checkout -- main.c
      
2. Create an Initial Respository

   -  Go to your top-level folder (it doesn't matter whether it is empty or not);
   -  Run: "$git init". Unlike CVS and Sub version, which place revision information in CVS and .svn subdirectories within each of your project's directories, Git place all its revision information in this one-top level “.git      ” directory at the top level of your project.

3. Adding files to your Respository

   -  $ git add index.html

      to add all files in the directories. Use "git add ." (single period or "dot" in Unix parlance, is shorthand for current directory).
     
      So now the file is only staged. This is only the interim step before committal.
   -  The command git status reveals the above in-between state of index.html.

   -  Set the editor for interactive sessions:

      e.g.  export GIT_EDITOR=vim.

4. Configuring the Commit Author

   -  Before making many commits to a repository, you should establish some basic environment and configuration options. 

      $ git config user.name "Jon Loeliger"
      $ git config user.email "jdl@example.com"

      You can also tell Git your name and email address using the GIT_AUTHOR_NAME and GIT_AUTHOR_EMAIL environment variables. If set, these variables override all configuration settings.

      Make changes to the repository:

      $git commit.

   -  You can view your commits by typing:

      $git log 

      This command shows all entries in order, from most recent to oldest.

   -  To see more detail about a particular commit, use git show with a commit number;

      $ git show 9da581d910c9c4ac93557ca4859e767f5caf5169

   -  

   -  To diff two commits:       

      $ git diff 9da581d910c9c4ac93557ca4859e767f5caf5169 \
            ec232cddfb94e0dfd5b5855af8ded7f5eb5c90d6

5. Removing Files in Your Repository.
      
   $git rm porm.txt

6. Rename Files in Your Repository.

   $git mv foo.html bar.html

   Git handles file move operations differently than most akin systems, employing a
   mechanism based on the similarity of the content between two file versions. The spe-
   cifics are described in Chapter 5.

7. Making a copy of your repository

   This is how people around the world use Git to pursue pet projects on the same files and keep in sync with other repositories.
   
    $git clone http://github.com/alexyuisme/study.git

8. Configuring an Alias

   $git config --global alias.show-graph \
   'log --graph -- abbrev-commit --pretty=oneline'


Chapter 4 basic Git Concepts

1. Repositories

   -  A git repository is simply a database containing all the information needed to retain and manage the revisions and history of a project.
   -  Git repositories not only contain a complete working copy of all the files in repository but also a copy of the repository itself with which to work.
   -  Git manages and inspects configuration and setup information on a per-site, per-user, and per-repository basis.
   -  Two main data structures are maintined within a repository: 1) the object store; 2) the index. Those two data structures are described below:

2. Git Object Types

   This data structure is designed to be efficiently copied during a clone operation as part of the mechanism that supports a fully distributed CVS. It contains your original data files and all the log messages, author information, dates, and other information required to rebuild any version or branch of the project.

   Git places only four types of objects in the object store: 1) blobs; 2) trees; 3) commits; 4) tags.

   -  Blobs: stands for "binary large objects". It holds a file's data but does not contain any metadata about the file or even its name.

   -  trees: A tree object represents one level of directory information. It records blob identifiers, pathnames, , and a bit of metadata. Also, it can recurively reference other (sub)tree objects. 

   -  Commits: A commit object holds metadata for each change introduced into repository, including the author, commiter, commit date, and log message.

   -  Tags: a tag object assigns an arbitrary yet presumably human-readable name to a specific object, usually a commit. Although 9da581d910c9c4ac93557ca4859e767f5caf5169 refers to an exact and well-defined commit, a more familiar tag name like Ver-1.0-Alpha might make more sense!

   To save more space, Git compresses and stores the objects in pact files, which are also placed in the object store. 

 3.Index

   The index is a temporary and dynamic binary file that describes the directory structure of the entire repository. More specifically, the index captures a version of the project's overall structure at some moments in time. The project's state could be represented by a commit and a tree from any point in the project's history, or it could be a future state toward which you are actively developing.  

4. Content-Addressable names

  The Git object store is organized and implemented as a content-addressable storage system. Specifically, each object in the object store has a unique name produced by applying SHA1 to the contents of the object, yielding an unique SHA1 hash value. Any tiny changes to a file causes the SHA hash to change, causing the new version of the file to be indexed seperately.

5. Git Track Content

   - First, Git's objects store is based on the hashed computation of the contents of its objects, not on the file or directory names from the user's original file layout. Again, Git tracks content instead of file.

   - If one files is changed, Git computes a new SHA1 for it(How?). Determines that it is now a different blob object, and adds the new blob to the object store. The original blob remains in the object store for the unchanged file to use.

   - Git computes the history of changes on a file as a set of changes between different blobs with varying hashes, rather than storing a filename and a set of differences directly(?It seems quite odd for me. How can the difference be restored if only hashes are saved). 

6. Object Store Pictures

   The following shows how Git's objects fit and work together to form the complete system.

  (V1.0)                      (branch name)
   tag  ------>"Commit" <--------master
                  |
                  |
                  |
                  v
                 tree
                  |
                  |
            |------------|
            |            |  
            |            |
            v            v
           blob         blob
          (dead23)    (feeble)

   -  blob is the bottom of the data structure;
   -  tree points to blobs or other tree object as well;
   -  a commit points to one particular tree that is introduced into the repository by the commit.
   -  each tag is represented by a parallelogram. It can only points to at most one commit.
   -  branch is not a Git object but still plays a crucial role in naming commits.

Chapter 7 Branches

-  Branch Names

   The default branch in a repository is named master, and most developers keep the repository's most robust
   and dependable line of development on that branch(You can rename or even delete the master branch).

   To support scalability and categorical organization, you can create a hierarchical branch name that resembles
   a Unix pathname.  One reason to use hierarchical branch names is that Git, just like the Unix shell, supports 
   wildcards. For instance, given the naming scheme bug/pr-1023 and bug/pr-17, you can select all bug branches at 
   once with a clever and familiar shorthand.

   git show-branch 'bug/*' 

   Dos and Don'ts in Branch Names. Branch names must conform to a few simple rules:

   -  Use the forward slash(/) to create a hierarchical name scheme. However, the name cannot end with a slash.
   -  No slash-seperated component can begin with a dot(.). A branch name such as feature/.new is invalid.
   -  Cannot contain (..) anywhere.
   -  Further, the name cannot contain:

      -  Any space or other whitespace character.
      -  A character that has special meaning to Git, including the tilde(~), caret(^), colon(:), question-mark(?), asterisk(*), and open bracket([)
      -  An ASCII control character, which is any byte with a value lower than \040 octal, or the DEL character(\177 octal)

-  Using Branches

   There may be many different branches within a repository at any given time, but there is at most one "active" or "current" branch.

   Active Branch:    it determines what files are checked-out in the working directory.
   Current Branch:   it is often an implicit operand in Git commands, such as the target of the merge operation. By default, master is the active branch, 
                     but you can make any branch the current branch.

   Each branch in a specific repository must have a unique name, and the names always refer to the most recent revision committed on that branch.
   

      
   
