-  Introduction

The API's job is to make the developers as successful as possible. The 
orientation for APIs is to think about design choices from the application
developer's point of view. The primary design principle when crafting
API should be to maximize developer productivity and success. This is
what we call pragmatic REST.

-   Nones are good; verbs are bad

Principle 1: Keep simple things simple

A key litmus test we use for Web api design is that there should be only
2 base URLs per resource.

the first element is a collection; the second is for specific element in
the collection.

/dogs                    /dogs/1234


-   Keep verbs out 

-   Use HTTP verbs to operate on the collections and elements

We can operate on those two base URLs with HTTP verbs: POST, GET, PUT, and
DELETE. We think of them as mapping to the acronym: CRUD(CREATE-READ-UPDATE-DELETE)


Resource    POST                GET         PUT                 DELETE
            (create)            (read)      (update)            delete
/dogs       create a new dog    List dogs   Bulk update dogs    Delete all dogs
/dogs/1234  Error               Show Bo     if exists update Bo Delete Bo
                                            if not error

In summary:

Use two base URLs per resource.
Keep verbs out of your base URLs.
Use HTTP verbs to operate on the collections and elements.

-   Plural nones and concrete names

Concrete names are better than abstract

E.g. an API that accesses content in various forms - blogs, videos, news articles,
and so on. An api that models everything at the highest level of abstraction - 
as /items or /assets loses the opportunity to paint a tangible picture for developers
to know what they can do with this API.

In summary, an intuitive API uses plural rather than singular nouns, and concrete
rather than abstract names.

-   Simplify associations - sweep complexity under '?'

GET /owners/5678/dogs

POST /owners/5678/dogs

You shouldn't need too many cases where a URL is deeper than what we have above
/resource/identifier/resource

Sweep complexity behind the '?'

Make it simple for developers to use the base URL by putting optional states
and attributes behind the HTTP question mark. To get all red dogs running in the park:

GET /dogs?color=red&state=running&location=park



In summary, keep your API intuitive by simplifying the associations between resources,
and sweeping parameters and other complexities under the rug of the HTTP question mark.

-   Handling errors

Errors become a key tool providing contect and visiblity into how to use an API.

There are over 70 HTTP status codes. Most API providers use a small subset. Here 
is the question: How many status codes should you use for API?

When you boil it down, there are really only 3 outcomes in the interaction between
an app and an API:

1) Everything worked - success
2) The client application did something wrong - client error
3) The API did something wrong - server error

Start by using the following 3 codes.

-   200 OK
-   400 Bad Request
-   500 Internal Server Error

If you're not comfortable reducing all your error conditions to these 3, try
picking among these additional 5:

-   201 Created
-   304 Not Modified
-   404 Not Found
-   404 Unauthorized
-   403 Forbidden

-  Make messages returned in the payload as verbose as possible. This is very useful to provide as many hints
   as possible for API developers to fix the problem. We recommend you add a link in your description, like Twilio.

Code for code

200 - OK
401 - Unauthorized

Message for people:

{"developerMessage" : "Verbose, plain language description of
the problem for the app developer with hints about how to fix
it.", "userMessage":"Pass this message on to the app user if
needed.", "errorCode" : 12345, "more info":
"http://dev.teachdogrest.com/errors/12345"}

-  Tips for versioning

    Versioning is one of the most important considerations when designing your Web API. Let's look at how three top API providers handle versioning:

    Twilio:         /2010-04-01/Accounts

    Note: No idea the timestamp is the release date or compile date?

    salesforce.com: /services/data/v20.0/sobjects/Account

    Note: the ".0" implies that the current version is not stable enougth.

    Facebook:       ?v=1.0

    Note: This is problamatic because as soon as Facebook forced the API up to the next version, all the apps that didn't 
    include the version number broke and had to pulled back and version numbers added.

    -   Never release an API withput a version and make the version MANDATORY.

        1) Specify the version with a 'v' prefix. Move it all the way to the left in the URL so that is has the highest scope.

        e.g. /v1/dogs

        2) Use a simple ordinal number. Don't use the dot notation like v1.2 because it implies a granularily of versioning that doesn't work well with APIs--
        it's an interface not an implementation. Stick with v1, v2 and so on.

        3) Should version and format be in URLs or headers?

    -   How many versions should you maintain?

        At least one version back.

    -   For how long should you maintain a version?

        Give developers at least one cycle to react before obsoleting a version.

        It depends on your: 

        1) developer's development platform
        2) application type
        3) application user

        E.g. Sometime it takes 6 months, and sometimes takes 2 years. Mobile apps take longer to rev' than web apps. (why??)

    -   Should version and formats be in URLs or headers?

        Lots of prefer putting the version in the headers for many reasons:
        
        1) it leverages the HTTP standard(??)

        2) it solves the inter-dependant apis(??)

        3) it's intellectually consistent with Fielding's versions(??)

        4) and more...

        Simple rules we follow:

        1) If it changes the logic you write to handel the response, put it in the URL so you can see it easily.

        2) If it doesn't change the logics for each response, like OAuth information, put it in the header.

    -   Pagination and partial response

        -   Partial responses

            Partial response allows you to give developers just the information they need. Let's take a look at some of the examples:

            -   Linkedin

            /people:(id,first-name,last-name,industry)

            This request returns the id, first-name, last-name and the industry.

            Linkedin just does partial selection using the terse:(...) syntax which is not self-evident. Plus it's difficult for a developer to reverse
            engineer the meaning using a search engine(??).

            -   Facebook

                /joe.smith/friends?fields=id,name,picture

            -   Google

                ?fields=title,media:group(media:thumbnail)

                Google and Facebook have a similar approach, which works well.

                As you see in this example, you can put some sub-objects in responses to pull in other information from additional resources.

            -   Add optional fields in a comma-delimited list.

                /dogs?fields=name, color, location

                The partial selection syntax can also be used to include associated cutting down on the number of requests needed to get the required information.

        -   Make it easy for developers to paginate objects in a database.

                -   Facebook uses "offset" and "limit"

                -   Twitter uses "page" and "rpp" (records per page)

                -   Linkedin uses "start" and "count".

            -   Use "offset" and "limit".

                -   Meta data

                    We also recommand to include meta-date in each response that is paginated that indicated to the developer the total number of records available.

                -   What about defaults?

                    The loose rule of thumb for default pagination is limit=10 with offset=0.

                    The pagination defaults are of course dependant on your data size:

                    If your resources are large, you probably want to limit it to fewer tha 10;
            

            

        
