Chapter 1 Preface

-   What is data mining

    Data mining is the process of transfering raw data to useful infomation.
    
    Three phases: 1) preprocessing; 2) data mining; 3) postprocessing

-   Problems in data mining

    -   Scalable

        e.g. data is too big to put into the memory.

        We need new software/hardware to store/access/process the data

    -   High dimensional

    -   Complicated data

    -   Data ownership and distribution

    -   Non-tradional analysis

-   Data mining area

    Data mining is the intersect area among: 1) Stastics; 2) AI, Machine Learning, 
    Pattern Recognition; 3) DataBase, Parallel Computing, Distributed Computing

-   Data mining missions

    -   Prediction

        Input:  explanatory variable(or called independent variable)
        Output: target variable(or dependent variable)

    -   Description

        This target is to describe the relationships among data:

        -   Association
        -   Trend
        -   Cluster
        -   Tracking
        -   Anormal

-   Predictive modeling

    The model for prediction. There are two types: 

    1) classfication;

    It is used to predict discrete target variables. E.g. Predict a web user whether he/she will buy books on line. There are only two
    variables: buy or no buy and they are discrete.

    2) regression

    It is used to predict continuous target variables. E.g. predict the future price of a stock.

-   Association Analysis

    It is used to find out strong association among data. E.g. Understand the relationships among different elements in a climat system.

-   Cluster analysis

    It is the task of grouping a set of objects in such a way that objects in the same group (called a cluster) are more similar (in some sense or another)
    to each other than to those in other groups(clusters). E.g. In social networks, clustering may be used to recognize communities within large groups
    of people.

-   Anomaly detection

    This task is to recognize a data that its features are different from other data. E.g. detect credit card fraud.

Chapter 2 Data

-   Some features of data are critical to data mining:

    -   Type
    -   Quality
    -   Easy for preprocessing
    -   Use relationships among data to do analysis

-   Anomaly 
    
